General

[d]These are generally excellent novels. My criteria here is essentially *what would I not be embarrassed to read in public*. [/d]

|Spice and Wolf|
spice-wolf.gif
Holo is a powerful wolf deity who is celebrated and revered in the small town of Pasloe for blessing the annual harvest. Yet as years go by and the villagers become more self-sufficient, Holo, who stylizes herself as the "Wise Wolf of Yoitsu," has been reduced to a mere folk tale. When a traveling merchant named Kraft Lawrence stops at Pasloe, Holo offers to become his business partner if he eventually takes her to her northern home of Yoitsu. The savvy trader recognizes Holo's unusual ability to evaluate a person's character and accepts her proposition. Now in the possession of both sharp business skills and a charismatic negotiator, Lawrence inches closer to his goal of opening his own shop. However, as Lawrence travels the countryside with Holo in search of economic opportunities, he begins to realize that his aspirations are slowly morphing into something unexpected.

[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spice_and_Wolf)
Topping off the list is Spice and Wolf, and though the list is not ordered by quality, there is no doubt that this is one my favorites. It was licensed by Yen Press quite a while ago, and they've translated nearly the entire 17 novel series by now. 

The novel features two main elements: drama and intrigue, often economically themed, and romance. Though no doubt the bizarreness of a medieval fantasy starring economics of all things is what initially attracted many to the series, what kept them was the romance. Unlike other works in this genre, both Lawrence and Holo are adults, and both are reasonably intelligent. The romance is slow but steady, growing at a far more realistic pace than in other light novels, where girls can fall for the main character after minutes of interaction. Though still a very innocent relationship as you'd expect in this genre, neither character is going to blush when holding hands.

The world of Spice and Wolf is great. Though medieval Europe is not exactly the most original setting, the novel does a much better job than other novels at presenting a sense of authenticity. There are no cafes here, no conveniently placed Japanese bathing areas, no delicious modern food. Life is hard, and people are grateful for small luxuries. What adds to this is the plot's relative subtlety. Lawrence and Holo, despite the former being an actual god, are no monsters of strength or intelligence, and the conflicts they get into are comparatively minor. Lawrence gets into debt, Holo mourns over her past; nothing Earth-shattering. Because of this, it's far easier to see the plot as just a microcosm of a much greater world.

The Yen Press translation is competent. Though the series is not amazing mechanically, it's more than good enough to convey the plot

Overall, the series is great, and I'd recommend it to just about anyone, especially those who like a more nuanced romance. It transcends the tropes that plagues other novels in the genre while emphasizing the tropes that make it click.

|Book Girl|
book-girl.jpg
The protagonist of the story, Konoha Inoue, is a seemingly normal senior high 2nd year student. His high school life, other than a hinted incident 2 years ago, can be summed up as normal- if one can dismiss the secret fact that he used to be a female bestselling romance author. Due to that incident, however, he has now vowed never to write again. This continued on until he was forced to join the literary club by the literary club president, the 3rd year female student Amano Tooko, a beautiful girl who has a taste for eating literary works. Now he has been tasked with writing her snack every day after school.

[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Book_Girl)
The description does an unfortunate job framing the story. The series is essentially a detective novel; Tooko plays the eccentric detective, while Inoue is her Watson. Each novel is themed by a particular literary work, usually classics, sometimes western but often Japanese. Unlike Sherlock Holmes, however, what the series is really about is character drama. And there is definitely a lot of drama. And unlike, say, Hyouka, the mysteries are fairly serious. You may begin to wonder at some point how the hell everyone near the main character is so batshit insane.

What really sets apart the novel, however, is the writing, and the better-than-normal translation from Yen Press. The author's colorful (and often very strange) analogies do a fantastic job at getting the drama-rich plot to stick at your heart.

Inoue, and just about everyone else in the novel, is hurt and traumatized. If you find it difficult to empathize with that kind of emotional trouble, you may not enjoy the novel. Do not expect a solid superman who always knows what to do. The characters here are weak and broken.  
Romance wise, it's there, and builds slowly through the series, but the main mysteries of each novel take the spotlight.

Otherwise, it's a fantastic mystery series, and I'd recommend anyone able to pick up a copy.

|Rakuin no Monshou|
rankuin.jpg
The countries of Mephius and Garbera have been waging a war for ten years and are trying to put an end to this long fight through a political marriage between the two royal families. Orba, who was driven from his home because of the war and was forced to become a gladiator, looks exactly like the crown prince of Mephius, and it has been decided he will be substituting him during the wedding ceremony. On the other hand, Vileena, the princess of Garbera, has secretly decided to ensnare the crown prince for her own country's interests.

[Baka-Tsuki](https://www.baka-tsuki.org/project/index.php?title=Rakuin_no_Monshou)
Rankuin no Monshou is part political intrigue and part action, describing the schemes and machinations of the main character Orba. Orba is a smart and ruthless, and so is the world he exists in. His ability to extract victory from every situation is a *bit* far fetched, but still satisfying. Vileena's character is, unfortunately, mostly relegated to being "strong willed". 

The plot is set in semi-medieval world, with some fantastical elements, like airships. The Kingdom of Mephius that most of the plot spends is situated in the desert, though the Kingdom itself is more aligned with western culture than, say, those of the great Arabic kingdoms and caliphates.

Just as a warning, Rankuin no Monshou *is dry*. If you don't like long winded descriptions of political planning, don't read the novel. Additionally, if you're here for the romance, well, it exist, but don't expect it to get anywhere anytime soon.

Translation wise, it's a fairly good fan translations. The sentences mostly flow together and there are little enough grammatical mistakes for you not to notice when reading.

I would recommend this to anyone who's a fan of political or war dramas and a strong, intelligent main character. The novel was able to incorporate a darker, more morally gray tone while not simply seeming edgy, and for that it's a good fit for people who are looking for a more serious experience.

|Utsuro no Hako to Zero no Maria|
hakomari.jpg
Kazuki Hoshino values his everyday life above all else. He spends the days carefree with his friends at school, until the uneventful bliss suddenly comes to a halt with the transfer of the aloof beauty Aya Otonashi into his class and her cold, dramatic statement to him immediately upon arrival: "I'm here to break you. This is my 13,118th school transfer, and even I can't help but reach the end of my tether after so many iterations. So for a change of pace, I'll declare war this time." And with those puzzling words, the ordinary days that Kazuki loved so dearly become a cycle of turmoil and fear-Aya's sudden appearance signals the unraveling of unseen mysteries surrounding Kazuki's seemingly normal friends, including the discovery of mysterious devices known as "boxes."

[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Empty_Box_and_the_Zeroth_Maria)

Utsuro no Hako to Zero no Maria, or it's shortened form Hakomari, is honestly fairly difficult to summarize with spoiling the plot. Each story arc in the series is very different from the rest, both in tone and in content.

One of the unique elements with Hakomari is that it, at least in its first installment, tries to do a bit more with the medium than simply tell a linear story, though I won't spoil how. While I'm not sure about the etymology of the label 'psychological', if there was any work it'd fit under, it's Hakomari. Though, to be honest, the sweeping sophistry about human nature can be a bit... grating, and perhaps seem a bit more clever than it really is, I found that it worked well enough under the atmosphere, though it may have caused a few eye-rolls.

Romance wise, it's there in the beginning, and though it takes a backseat to the plot at first, it steadily becomes more and more important.

Translations are competent. Though the flow is not necessarily the best, there are few grammatical errors.

There is a bit of a distribution issue at the moment; though all volumes were translated by fans at Baka-Tsuki, it was recently licensed by Yen Press. This means that you'll have to go through some back channels if you want to get a copy.

|Gekkou|
gekkou.jpg
Gekkou, or "Moonlight", is about the peculiar relationship between a cynical boy and a perfect girl. Said cynical boy is Nonomiya who spends day in day out in boredom, taking refuge from his dull life in his imagination. One fateful day, he happens upon the notebook of the much-rumored beauty Youko Tsukimori, neglected on the ground. Poking out from it is a scrap of paper with the unexpected title "Murder Recipe". His interest ignited, he immediately stuffs it into his pocket, only to find out the promising recipe contains nothing but scenarios that may or may not lead to deadly accidents, not even worthy of being called a plan. When he tentatively asks her about it the next day, she hasn't lost anything. But then her father dies. An accident...

[Baka-Tsuki](https://www.baka-tsuki.org/project/index.php?title=Gekkou)

Gekkou is a one shot romance mystery. It's not a particularly action filled novel and features plenty more philosophical musings, which may or not make sense. The two main characters are both intelligent and their banter is entertaining.

Translation wise, like the other novels on the page, it's fairly good, with little grammatical errors and decent flow.

|Shinrei Tantei Yakumo|
yakumo.jpg
For the sake of a friend possessed by a ghost, a young college student Ozawa Haruka visits her university's Movie Research Club. Haruka finds inside a young man - Saitou Yakumo, who is believed to have psychic powers. The two of them begin to investigate the weird occurrences that are happening around Haruka's friends together, as Haruka is convinced that Yakumo is just a fake psychic. Will they be able to find the culpit who murdered the person possessing Haruka's friend before he kills all of the friends who visited the abandoned building and Haruka as well? All in all, Haruka finds out that this young man is the real deal! Yakumo's red left eye can see what others cannot - the spirits of the dead. With this power and mostly Yakumo's great people perception they're solving this confusing, un-earthly case. This case is just the start of the string of incidents happening around them. And Haruka is unlucky enough to get involved and then she always brings new cases to Yakumo, just to his annoyance!

[Baka-Tsuki](https://www.baka-tsuki.org/project/index.php?title=Shinrei_Tantei_Yakumo)

I almost didn't include this one on the list, but in the end it squeaked through. Shinrei Tantei Yakumo is a mystery, and yes, it *is* a shoujo, *however*, with a main couple and no reverse harems, as well as the fact that, most of the time, the mystery is the main focus means that even people who don't like shoujos should be able to stomach this one. Poor Haruka does enjoy her fair share of (verbal) abuse from the eccentric, arrogant shoujo prototype Yakumo until he warms up.

The mysteries are intriguing, though the conclusions are sometimes a bit of a let-down.

Translation is good; there are grammatical mistakes every so often, but not enough to detract from your ability to understand what's going on.


