Slice of Life/Harems

Slice of Life novels, which may or may not involve a harem.

|Rokujouma no Shinryakusha!?|
rokujouma.jpg
Now that he has started his high school career, Satomi Koutarou begins his life living alone in an apartment that only costs him 5000 yen per month, an extremely cheap deal. There's a catch, though: the apartment, Room 106 of the Corona House, is haunted by a ghost that has driven all the apartment's prior occupants away. In addition to having to compete with the ghost over the ownership of the apartment, Koutarou must deal with various other troublesome characters who appear in Room 106.

[Baka-Tsuki](https://www.baka-tsuki.org/project/index.php?title=Rokujouma_no_Shinryakusha!%3F)

Rokujouma is one of the novels that really surprised with me just how *good* it is. For a harem, the plot is surprisingly well constructed. You might think it generic in the beginning, but as you progress, the pieces start to fit and you go, "wow, the author actually thought this through!"

Of course, one of the very important elements of a harem is the girls. Thankfully, Rokujouma features a diverse cast, each with their own defined personalities. Though there are tsunderes, they quickly warm up. The romance element, too, progresses steadily, and so does the main character. The girls are cute, the protagonist feels like a human being, people actually develop and change--the series has no issue with its characters. If I could fault something, it's that the harem expands a bit too quickly as the series progresses.

At first, I hesitated to even place this under Slice of Life--despite it's premise, there is quite a bit of fighting. But the Slice of Life elements are generally more present, so I placed it here.

Translation wise, it's very good. Sometimes, ideas are repeated more than they should be, and sentence structure can be a bit basic, though I don't know if that's a translation issue or just the novel's writing style. In any case, you'll have no troubles reading it, and the translators works very quickly. Overall, the translations gets a thumbs up from me.
